---
layout: post
title: GoPro Plus
---

This is the story of a project I started (almost exactly) two months
ago.  Not much of it is about the code itself (links at the bottom),
but you can read what I did and why and stuff.  I got to write a bunch
of stuff in my favorite language and learn a new language along the
way.  I also got a little bit of control over my media.

# GoPro Plus

<div>
    <img src="/images/beach-small.jpg" alt="beach"
        title="sunset at the beach"
        class="floatleft" width="400" height="300" />
</div>

I got a new GoPro Hero 8 for a trip I took recently.  There were lots
of exciting things to look at.  The picture to the left was taken on
January 20 at a resort in Siquijor.

The resort had quite good connectivity, and since I bought a new
GoPro, I figured I'd try out the GoPro Plus 30 day trial thing they
were offering.  I could plug in my camera and my video and pictures
and stuff would magicaly be stored safely in The Cloudâ„¢.

## GoPros

GoPro Plus ends up being something like $5/mo (or I think $50/year if
you do it annually).  For this, you get unlimited storage and up to
two camera replacements per year.  It's a pretty good deal to not have
to worry about asset tracking, etc...  And the camera replacement is a
good incentive to actually try to use the thing.

The mobile app lets you browse around in the cloud-stored data and
find things of interest to assemble into videos locally.  It does a
pretty good job of thinking up the edits and stuff for you.

Also, this isn't my first GoPro, but you can upload video through
their web UI.  I uploaded a bunch of my old clips so I could store all
my footage in one cloudy place.

Except, there were a few things that annoyed me about this.

## GoCons

There were a few things that annoyed me about GoPro Plus early on (in
no particular order):

1. The web site made it quite difficult to navigate anything but your
   most recent media.
2. While you could upload media and the camera could upload time lapse
   photos as a single medium, the web UI didn't let you do this.
3. Sometimes, things would just not upload and I couldn't figure out
   why.
4. Downloading in bulk (e.g., a day's worth of stuff) is nearly
   impossible.
5. Sharing is painful and broken.

As I became more of a power user, I found weirder, more obscure bugs
(e.g., items stuck on their end in a particular state, or incorrectly
recognized media).

But perhaps the biggest problem of all:  I wanted to be able to make
sure I could tell what media I'd uploaded and retrieve it all at
will.  I don't know if this service will last forever, but I do know I
would like my media to, so if they decide to shut down or something, I
want to know I can get all my media out quickly and easily.

This is a fairly big flaw, as GoPro Plus doesn't have an API.  Well,
officially...

## Getting My Data

<div>
    <img src="/images/dive-small.jpg" alt="rope swing flop"
        title="flawless half backflip from a rope swing"
        class="floatright" width="250" height="384" />
</div>

I finally decided to dive in on February 26.  I found a little bit of
stuff online where people had managed to get a listing from the media
service, but these were all quite incomplete and didn't meet any of my
goals.

My goto language these days is [Haskell](https://www.haskell.org/) as
it's consistently the easiest language I work in so I started
exploring the API endpoint in ghci with
[wreq](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/wreq) and
[aeson](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/aeson).  As it turns out,
their web app is just a javascript interface to the same API the
mobile devices use, so it was relatively easy to just watch what it
does and do the same thing.

I spent a bit of time over the weekend just making essential bits.
The first thing I figured I should do was capture all metadata from
the search results into a local sqlite database, along with the
thumbnails I could get from their image servers.  I built my `gopro`
commandline tool to manage authentication tokens (and refreshes) and
then built a little web service that could give me my data back.

The GoPro Plus media-browser web site has endless scrolling of a few
tens of items at a time.  If I want to find the oldest of my 2,229
items I currently have stored, it might take me ten minutes just to
scroll to the bottom (go to bottom of page, wait for load, repeat).
Just getting to footage from the above trip is an excursion in
itself.

Initially, I built an interface using
[crossfilter](http://crossfilter.github.io/crossfilter/) to let me do
multi-dimensional filtering of my data quickly and easily, but I don't
much like working in JavaScript, so I decided to learn
[elm](https://elm-lang.org/) as part of this project.  My new UI in elm
was much more pleasant to work with, but there's no crossfilter and
javascript FFI is awkward even when you're not trying to do something
that fancy.  But all I really needed was a collection of filter
functions to apply in succession, so writing my own functional
equivalent of crossfilter in elm ended up being basically something
like this:

```elm
List.filter (\m -> List.all (\f -> f model m) allFilters) media
```

Given that I know when all of the media was captured and from what
device, and what the type of media it was, I could easily build myself
a date-based filter and camera filter and type filter and suddenly
could ~instantly.

## Need More Data

However, the GoPro Hero 8 captures some really rich telemetry.  They
open-sourced a [parser](https://github.com/gopro/gpmf-parser) for this
which is super cool, but I ran into two problems with it:

1. Their code seems very difficult to use (see the hundreds of lines
   of their basic
   [demo](https://github.com/gopro/gpmf-parser/tree/master/demo)).
2. The demo didn't even display very relevant data for most of my
   media.

That was a little unfortunate.  I want access to all of the metadata,
but after playing with their C code for a bit, I finally realized
that's quite an uphill battle.

So I finally just read their spec and wrote a [gpmf
parser](https://github.com/dustin/gpmf) from scratch.  My core GPMF
parser is under 100 lines of code and gave me complete data from every
sample I ran into.  The low-level data is a bit too low-level, so I
added another ~176 SLOC to cover higher level concepts like GPS
location and speed, face detection, etc...

Now I just needed to extract all the metadata from my ~700GB library.

However, you don't need the entire content for this.  It turns out
that as part of processing your video uploads, GoPro Plus produces a
few different variants of your content.  This typically includes a
remarkably small one called `mp4_low` which usually carries the full
metadata.  There are lots of qualifiers in there because things aren't
*entirely* consistent, but it's good enough:

```haskell
ms <- asum [
  fv "mp4_low" (fn "low"),
  fv "high_res_proxy_mp4" (fn "high"),
  fv "source" (fn "src"),
  pure Nothing]
```

`fv` here is a function that locally caches a stream from GoPro by
name and then attempts to extract a GPMF stream from it.  Often,
`mp4_low` has it and we're done quickly and easily.  If not, try the
higher res variant used for streaming in the browser, then the source,
then give up and declare there's no GPMF (e.g., my old Hero 4 footage
doesn't have any).

I added geographical areas to my database, a web handler to retreive
them, summarized location in my metadata and added a bit of
point-in-box Elm code.  At this point, "Show me all of my media taken
in the Philippines in the year 2020" is two clicks, roughly instant,
and I see `Showing 426 (49.88 GB) out of 2,229 items (946.81 GB)`
along with all the nicely grouped thumbnails in my web UI.

## Syncing

<div>
    <img src="/images/cutting.jpg" alt="syncing"
        title="cutting wood with amos"
        class="floatright" width="350" height="263" />
</div>

Syncing is relatively straightforward.  I run my commandline tool
periodically.  It asks for paginated media ordered by upload date
(descending) and keeps asking for pages until it sees a media ID it
already has.  Subtract the existing data and I can pull down
whatever's leftover.

I keep metadata, thumbnails, and downloadable variant metadata (minus
URLs as they expire) in my media table.  So grab these things for each
missing record in concurrent batches (as not to do everything at once)
and commit them to my local DB.

I have this `retrieve` function that, given a medium ID returns the
list of downloadable artifacts.  The URLs themselves are signed s3
URLs that expire after a bit, so they're only really interesting when
you're actualy downloading an artifact.  There are a few different
types of artifacts, some of which have one URL and some have
multiple.  The resulting JSON includes `url` as a key for when there's
one URL, and `urls` when there's more than one.  This sort of makes
sense, but it causes a lack of uniformity.  Each one *also* has a
`head`/`heads` variation of the URL for issuing a `HEAD` request
instead of a `GET` request.

This detail sounds boring, but one interesting thing here a fun
aeson-lens tip.  If you have an arbitrarily complex [chunk of
JSON](https://gist.github.com/dustin/081e6fae77a540aed5279f8962cadf55)
without much uniformity, but for any object anywhere within the
structure, you want to remove a couple of keys, you could write
something like this:

```haskell
fetchSansURLs :: (HasGoProAuth m, MonadIO m) => MediumID -> m (Maybe Value)
fetchSansURLs = fmap (_Just . deep values . _Object %~ sans "url" . sans "head") . retrieve
```

(the actual version excludes `urls` and `heads`, but that's not an
important detail and this line's long enough).

### Web Syncing

One seemingly unnecessary annoyance is that I had to reload my web
page every time I did a commandline sync.  I made this slightly better
by just making a data sync (soft reload) button, but I thought it
might be better to sync from the web UI itself.

The biggest problem with this was knowing what's going on while this
is happening.  I'm using an elm library called
[toasty](https://package.elm-lang.org/packages/pablen/toasty) to put
little ephemeral popups on the screen.  I'm also using `MondaLogger`
in the commandline tool.  Combining these seems like a good idea.

Initially, I was asking the UI to poll the server to look for items in
the database that should be displayed on the UI.  This was gross for
lots of reasons.  I decided this might be a good time to learn a bit
about websockets.

I'd "used" websockets once in the past when I added websocket support
for my [mqtt library](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/net-mqtt),
but this was mostly theoretical and all client-side.  I figured
server-side websockets in Haskell would be a bit of a challenge and
client-side in Elm would be easy.  My expectations were totally
backwards.

I wrote a custom stderr logging function and a logging function that
writes to an [STM broadcast
TChan](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/stm/docs/Control-Concurrent-STM-TChan.html).
The latter is what I ended up using for websockets.  I initially would
do something fancy during the sync to redirect the log using a local
logger mutation, but I figured I might as well just always log to the
websocket channel in case any browsers are attached.  It's slightly
less code.

My logger looks like this:

```haskell
notificationLogger :: TChan Notification
                   -> (Loc -> LogSource -> LogLevel -> LogStr -> IO ())
notificationLogger ch _ _ lvl str = case lvl of
                                      LevelDebug -> pure ()
                                      LevelInfo  -> note NotificationInfo
                                      _          -> note NotificationError
  where note t = atomically $ writeTChan ch (Notification t "GoPro" lstr)
        lstr = TE.decodeUtf8 $ fromLogStr str
```

...and that's hooked up to the web like this:

```haskell
wsapp :: Env -> WS.ServerApp
wsapp Env{noteChan} pending = do
  ch <- atomically $ dupTChan noteChan
  conn <- WS.acceptRequest pending
  WS.withPingThread conn 30 (pure ()) $
    forever (WS.sendTextData conn . J.encode =<< (atomically . readTChan) ch)
```

At this point, my entire web-based sync on the server-side looks like
this:

```haskell
post "/api/sync" do
  _ <- lift . async $ do
    runFullSync
    sendNotification (Notification NotificationReload "" "")
  status noContent204
```

The `NotificationReload` that gets sent is a special message that
isn't displayed by the browser, but just indicates that it should
reload the media catalog.

So, now that that's done, let's do the elm side.  I won't dump all
that code out here (it was a lot).  The short story is that Elm
doesn't have native websockets support and wiring it up was a bit of a
pain.  It's not too bad after that, though.  `Notification` messages
come in and are dispatched easily enough:

```elm
doNotifications : Model -> List Notification -> ( Model, Cmd Msg )
doNotifications model =
    let reload_ (m, a) =
            (m, Cmd.batch [a, reload])
        doNote n m =
            case n.typ of
                NotificationInfo    -> toastSuccess n.title n.msg m
                NotificationError   -> toastError n.title n.msg m
                NotificationReload  -> reload_ m
                NotificationUnknown -> toastError "Unhandled Notification" (n.msg) m
    in
        List.foldr doNote (model, Cmd.none)
```

<br/>

## Uploading

<div>
    <img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/dustin/gopro-plus/master/upload.png" alt="uploading"
        title="upload process"
        class="floatleft" width="185" height="210" />
</div>

The upload process is
[complicated](https://github.com/dustin/gopro-plus/wiki/Upload).  I've
not documented the whole in English, but my
[GoPro.Plus.Upload](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/gopro-plus/docs/GoPro-Plus-Upload.html)
module does all of the things I've figured out how to do.

It's quite facinating.  A single medium upload can consist of multiple
files (e.g., a timelapse photo series, or a video that was so large it
broke into multiple files on its own).  Additionally, they're
leveraging S3 chunked uploads such that when you define an upload and
specify your chunk size (I'm using 6MB which is what they use in the
web app), they give you a collection of pre-signed URLs to do the
upload.  The order you process these things doesn't matter.

In the end, this means you can get massive parallelism for most
uploads.  Some of my uploads have consisted of hundreds of parts.  I
don't have great connectivity where I am currently, but I can rsync my
media to a location with good connectivity without any care for how
long it takes.  Once it arrives, I can use my commandline tool to
upload with all the cores and network I can throw at the problem and
then tie it up in the end.

I end up doing a lot of fun parallelism in this project, which often
gets too large.  I get a lot of use out of this function:

```haskell
mapConcurrentlyLimited :: (MonadMask m, MonadUnliftIO m, Traversable f)
                       => Int
                       -> (a -> m b)
                       -> f a
                       -> m (f b)
mapConcurrentlyLimited n f l = liftIO (newQSem n) >>= \q -> mapConcurrently (b q) l
  where b q x = bracket_ (liftIO (waitQSem q)) (liftIO (signalQSem q)) (f x)
```

My commandline tool has two different upload commands because in one
case you want to just blast a bunch of photos and clips up and in the
other case, you want to sequence a series of parts into a single item
of a specific type.  This was a huge win for me because before I
figured out how to do this, I had a couple folders of hundreds photos
each that were GoPro time lapses that I couldn't upload to GoPro using
any of their tools.

Actually, it's got a third upload command because I was able to
recover a failed upload, but that was a super complicated process and
their API doesn't *quite* let you do this in a usefully automatable
way.

## Up...dating?

One issue I found in my bulk uploads is that I had a large number of
items for which GoPro couldn't recognize the camera.  This was
especially weird because *I* could.  More specifically, in many cases,
my own GPMF parser correctly identified the camera used, but GoPro
didn't know what it was.

I had found a URL from which I could `GET` the details of a medium by
its ID and I had observed in the process that it would mutate its
state by using a simple `PUT`.  Can I do that?

I wrote a `fixup` command that lets me do bulk edits on the *GoPro*
side using SQL queries.  e.g., consider the following query:

```sql
select m.media_id, g.camera_model
    from media m join meta g on (m.media_id = g.media_id)
    where m.camera_model is null
    and g.camera_model is not null
```

This query emits one row per record where I know the camera type from
my metadata extraction, but GoPro does not.  The
[fixup](https://github.com/dustin/gopro/blob/master/src/GoPro/Commands/Fixup.hs)
code will run that query, look up each item based on the returned
column `media_id` and update the JSON fields corresponding to the
column names returned from the SQL query (e.g., `camera_model` above)
and row values/types.  I fixed up something like 800 bad items with a
single, simple command.

    gopro fixup "select m.media_id, g.camera_model ..."

I also used this for individual edits since I could craft literal rows
for edits easily enough and didn't otherwise need to make a special
tool.  Not all fields are editable, though.

## Extraction

<div>
    <img src="/images/retrieve.jpg" alt="retrieving"
        title="extracting all the things"
        class="floatright" width="285" height="225" />
</div>

But what if I want to move everything out of GoPro Plus *right now*?

I have a `gopro backup` command that does that.  It uses local
credentials and my previously mentioned `retrieve` command to request
all the (signed) media URLs from GoPro Plus and then pushes them into
an [SQS](https://aws.amazon.com/sqs/) queue which delivers to an [AWS
Lambda](https://aws.amazon.com/lambda/) function whose job is to copy
the data into my own S3 bucket.  Since GoPro itself stores all of its
data in S3, I figured moving the data from their bucket to mine using
AWS technologies made sense.

I did write [some
javascript](https://github.com/dustin/gopro/blob/master/lambda/download-to-s3.js)
for the lambda function, but it's small and boring.

In my current, low-bandwidth, unreliable network state, I can move
~1TB of media out of GoPro cloud into bits I control with a small
command that takes a couple minutes to run.  Most of the time on my
end is just making a couple thousand calls (though I'm using
`mapConcurrentlyLimited` here, of course).  Then it's just however
fast AWS Lambda wants to feed my function.

There's really no reason I couldn't just convert this to my own GoPro
Plus from here.  I've got browsing, media persistence, etc...  I just
need to do a bit of scaling, but I'm already using ffmpeg...

## Resources / Current Status

Relevant github repos:

* [GoPro Plus client library](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/gopro-plus)
* [GPMF Parser](https://github.com/dustin/gpmf)
* [GoPro Plus CLI/Web UI](https://github.com/dustin/gopro)

The GoPro Plus client API is fairly complete.  There are parts I
understand, but haven't really used because I haven't figured out what
I want to do with them.  e.g., I couldn't figure out how to retrieve
the contents of a GoPro Plus collection (for sharing), so they're not
super useful to me if they're write-only.   Also, device lists and
stuff aren't that interesting, but this code is pretty easy to work
on.  I've considered `fixup`-style editing into this library because
it'd be relatively easy.

The GPMF Parser low-level bits seemed to work with every sample I
could find, but I do think there are some theoretical things I didn't
implement.  I can't find anything that uses them, though.  The `DEVC`
stuff for higher-level abstraction has plenty of room for expansion in
areas that aren't that interesting to my current project.

The GoPro CLI and Web UI are good enough for me right now, which isn't
saying that much since I'm not much of a web designer.

![gopro ui](/images/gopro-ui.png)

## In Summary

With a bit of reverse engineering, learning a new programming
language, delving into parsing video telemetry extracting poring
through a silly number of third-party libraries to do all the things I
want (e.g., exif, websockets, amazonka, etc...), I made a cloud
service personally useful.

Hopefully someone else finds this work useful, too, but if I'm the
only GoPro Plus user out there, then at least I've got awesome tools.  :)
